docs/adr: Bad encoding fraud proof ADR (#492)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-006-befp.md

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Bad encoding fraud proof(BEFP)

## Changelog

- 2022.03.03 - init commit
- 2022.03.08 - added pub-sub

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn @Wondertan

## Context

> In case when node receive `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library it should generate a fraud proof that gets broadcasted to light clients to inform them that block could be malicious.

Reviewer: I think we can be more specific here on what exact type of node will do what for whom. Please consider this suggestion below 👇 

```suggestion
In case when a Full Node receives `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library, it generates a fraud proof.  After generation of it(fraud proof), a Full Node is broadcasting the fraud proof to Light Nodes, so they(Light Nodes) are notified that a block could be malicious.
```

## Decision

Started disscussion within:

- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

## Detailed Design

> It should be generated when after repairing the entire block, we detect recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots. The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):
> 
> Both of these errors consist of row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fraud proof is generated if recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots during block repair process

The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):

- Both errors consist of 
  - row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root
  - shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).
```

> `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` should be returned from RetrevieData. In this case `das.Daser` should generate a MerkleProofs for respective verified shares and create a BEFP. Then broadcast it to light clients via separate sub-service.
> 
> `das.Daser` should import a data structure that implements `proof.Broadcaster` interface that uses libp2p.pubsub under the hood:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` are returned from `RetrevieData`. In addition, `das.Daser`:

1. Generates a MerkleProofs for respective verified shares
2. Creates a BEFP
3. Broadcasts it(BEFP) to light nodes via separate sub-service.

`das.Daser` imports a data structure that implements `proof.Broadcaster` interface that uses libp2p.pubsub under the hood:
```

```go
// Broadcaster is a generic interface that sends a different kinds of fraud proofs to all subscribed on particular topic nodes
type Broadcaster interface {
   // Broadcast takes a Fraud proof data stucture that implements standart BinaryMarshal interface and sends data to light nodes using libp2p pub-sub under the hood.
   Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p encoding.BinaryMarshaller)  
}
```

Data serialization/deserialization will be performed with `protobuf.Marshal`/`protobuf.Unmarshal` and data structure will be described in proto file:

```proto3
enum FraudProofType {
   BadEncoding=0;
}

message MerkleProof {
   repeated bytes MerkleProof = 1;
}

message BadEnconding {
   required FraudProofType Type = 1;
   required uint64 Height = 2;
   repeated bytes Shares = 3;
   repeated MerkleProof MerkleProofs = 4;
}
```

> From the other side, the light nodes should be able to subscribe on particular fraud proof updates and verify received data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the other side, light nodes have the ability to subscribe to a particular fraud proof update and verify received data:
```

```go
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type
   Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType pb.FraudProofType) (Subscription, error)
}
```

```go
type Subscription interface {
   NextProof() (encoding.BinaryUnmarshal, error)
}
```

```go
type BadEncoding struct {
   Height uint64
   Shares [][]byte
   MerkleProofs [][][]byte
}
```

```go
type FraudService struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub
   topic  map[string]*pubsub.Topic
   mu    sync.Mutex
}

func(f *FraudService) Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType pb.FraudProofType) (Subscription, error){}

func(f *FraudService) Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p encoding.BinaryMarshaller){}
```

## Status
Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

Detect incorrectly encoded block

## References

Data Availability(Bad Encoding) Fraud Proofs: [#4](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4)
   

> Implement stubs for BadEncodingFraudProofs: [#263](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263) 

Reviewer: I think it's safe to include Full Note issue here, too 

wdyt?

Reviewer 2: which full node issue?

Author: not sure that we need to include this issue.

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Bad encoding fraud proof(BEFP)

## Changelog

- 2022.03.03 - init commit
- 2022.03.08 - added pub-sub

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn @Wondertan

## Context

In case when a Full Node receives `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library, it generates a fraud proof.  After generation of it(fraud proof), a Full Node is broadcasting the fraud proof to Light Nodes, so they(Light Nodes) are notified that a block could be malicious.

## Decision

> Started disscussion within:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BEFPs are addressed in the two below issues:
```

- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

## Detailed Design

> A fraud proof is generated if recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots during block repair process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A fraud proof is generated if recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots during block reparation. 
```

The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):

- Both errors consist of 
  - row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root
  - shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).

> `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` are returned from `RetrevieData`. In addition, `das.Daser`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` are returned as the error value from `RetrieveData`. 

In addition, `das.Daser`:
```

> 1. Generates a MerkleProofs for respective verified shares

Reviewer 2: generates several proofs?

Author: Yes, we should generate MerkleProof for each share that were repaired successfully. They will be provided as non-nil shares in `ErrByzantineRow.Share`/`ErrByzantineCol.Share`.

2. Creates a BEFP

> 3. Broadcasts it(BEFP) to light nodes via separate sub-service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Broadcasts the BEFP to light nodes via separate gossipsub network.
```
We're talking about `FraudSub` here, right? If so, we can say "Broadcasts the BEFP to the FraudSub gossipsub network which all Light Nodes listen to by default.

`das.Daser` imports a data structure that implements `proof.Broadcaster` interface that uses libp2p.pubsub under the hood:

```go
// Broadcaster is a generic interface that sends a different kinds of fraud proofs to all subscribed on particular topic nodes
type Broadcaster interface {
   // Broadcast takes a Fraud proof data stucture that implements standart BinaryMarshal interface and sends data to light nodes using libp2p pub-sub under the hood.
   Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p encoding.BinaryMarshaller)  
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason why this needs an interface? 

Will `Broadcaster` interface be implemented elsewhere outside of DASer? Is this done for testing purposes?

The name `Broadcaster` is confusing for this specific use case since `FraudSub` barely gets used. By barely gets used, I mean it is not a frequent event to broadcast a BEFP since this is a network-halting event.

Reviewer 2: Do merkle proofs for correct shares get broadcasted on every block?

Reviewer 3: > Do merkle proofs for correct shares get broadcasted on every block?

You mean under normal operation, orthogonal to BEFPs? Then...maybe? The sampling process involves descending through the tree, so by construction that means downloading a proof for each share sampled. Not sure if that's "broadcasted."

Reviewer 4: As we discussed there are going to be multiple Fraud types that need to be broadcasted on the network, thus the interface. ALso, the msg is a bit outdated.

Data serialization/deserialization will be performed with `protobuf.Marshal`/`protobuf.Unmarshal` and data structure will be described in proto file:

```proto3
enum FraudProofType {
   BadEncoding=0;
}

message MerkleProof {
   repeated bytes MerkleProof = 1;
}

message BadEnconding {
   required FraudProofType Type = 1;
   required uint64 Height = 2;
   repeated bytes Shares = 3;
   repeated MerkleProof MerkleProofs = 4;
}
```

> From the other side, light nodes have the ability to subscribe to a particular fraud proof update and verify received data:

Reviewer 2: Minor nit, but we should either stick to capitalising node types like `Light Node` or `Full Node` instead of capitalising it in some places and lower case in others. 

I vote to always keep it lower case.

```go
// Subscriber encompasses the behavior necessary to
// subscribe/unsubscribe from new FraudProofs events from the
// network.
type Subscriber interface {
   // Subscribe allows to subscribe on pub sub topic by it's type
   Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType pb.FraudProofType) (Subscription, error)
}
```

```go
type Subscription interface {

>    NextProof() (encoding.BinaryUnmarshal, error)

Reviewer 2: Again, how frequent do we expect proofs coming through `FraudSub`? 

If it's on every block, then this is fine, but otherwise it should have a different name.

Author: changed naming

}
```

```go
type BadEncoding struct {
   Height uint64
   Shares [][]byte
   MerkleProofs [][][]byte
}
```

```go
type FraudService struct {
   pubsub *pubsub.PubSub
   topic  map[string]*pubsub.Topic
   mu    sync.Mutex
}

func(f *FraudService) Subscribe(ctx context.Context, proofType pb.FraudProofType) (Subscription, error){}

func(f *FraudService) Broadcast(ctx context.Context, p encoding.BinaryMarshaller){}
```

## Status
Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

Detect incorrectly encoded block

> 

Reviewer 2: Can delete this category, self explanatory

Author: deleted

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Bad encoding fraud proof(BEFP)

## Changelog

> - 2021.03.03 - init commit

Reviewer 3: ?
```suggestion
- 2022.03.03 - init commit
```

> - 2021.03.03 - init commit

Reviewer 3: ?
```suggestion
- 2022.03.03 - init commit
```

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn

## Context

In case when node receive `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library it should generate a fraud proof that gets broadcasted to light clients to inform them that block could be malicious.

## Decision

Started disscussion within:

> https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
> 
> https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4

https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263
```
```suggestion
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263
```

> https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
> 
> https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4
- https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263
```

## Detailed Design
It should be generated when after repairing the entire block, we detect recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots. The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error [ErrByzantineRow](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22)/[ErrByzantineCol](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L28-L32):

> Both of these errors consist of column/row numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified(all correct shares).

Reviewer 3: For consistency
```suggestion
Both of these errors consist of row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified (all correct shares).
```

> Both of these errors consist of column/row numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified(all correct shares).

Reviewer 3: For consistency
```suggestion
Both of these errors consist of row/column numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified(all correct shares).
```

Using this info we need to prepare a fraud proof that will consist of:

>  1. Block height;
>  2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
>  3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Block height;
2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;
```

>  1. Block height;
>  2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
>  3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 1. Block height;
 2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
 3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;
```
```suggestion
1. Block height;
2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;
```

```go
type BadEncondingFraudProof struct {
    Height uint64
    Shares [][]byte
    MerkleProofs [][]byte
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: You should include a protobuf definition of the `BadEncondingFraudProof`, since that's what will be gossiped.

Also, this should probably match the rest of the types, which I _think_ is a `int64` for height (consult with one of the guys from the node team to confirm).

Also, shouldn't `MerkleProofs` be a `[][][]byte`?

Author: A protobuf definition will be added in the second part, where all Broadcast mechanism will be described.

> Also, shouldn't MerkleProofs be a [][][]byte?
Yes, thank you.

> ```

Reviewer 3: You should include a protobuf definition of the `BadEncondingFraudProof`, since that's what will be gossiped.

# ADR #006: Celestia-Node Bad encoding fraud proof(BEFP)

## Changelog

- 2021.03.03 - init commit

## Authors

@vgonkivs @Bidon15 @adlerjohn

## Context

> In case when node receives errors `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` it should generate a fraud proof that broadcasts message to light clients and informs that block could be malicious.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In case when node receive `ErrByzantineRow`/`ErrByzantineCol` from the [rsmt2d](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d) library it should generate a fraud proof that gets broadcasted to light clients and informs that block could be malicious.
```

## Decision

Started disscussion within:

https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/4

https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/263

## Detailed Design

> It should be generated when after repairing the entire block, we detect recovered data does not match with its respective row/column roots. The result of RepairExtendedDataSquare will be an error ErrByzantineRow/ErrByzantineCol:

Reviewer 5: @adlerjohn can't the ErrByzantineRow be generated even if you only have a single row (and equivalently for columns)?

Reviewer 3: Yes it can. This should say something like "after attempting to repair the block."

```go
// ErrByzantineRow is thrown when a repaired row does not match the expected row Merkle root.
type ErrByzantineRow struct {
   RowNumber uint     // Row index
   Shares    [][]byte // Pre-repaired row shares. Missing shares are nil.
}
```

```go
// ErrByzantineCol is thrown when a repaired column does not match the expected column Merkle root.
type ErrByzantineCol struct {
   ColNumber uint     // Column index
   Shares    [][]byte // Pre-repaired column shares. Missing shares are nil.
}

> ```

Reviewer 5: I do not think we need to list both of them here. ErrByzantineRow is sufficient and then just add a note: "and for columns, respectively."

> ```

Reviewer 5: Could even add a perma-link to rsmt2d lib here somewhere: https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/f34ec414859fc834835ea97ed54300404eec1ac5/extendeddatacrossword.go#L18-L22

Author: added links to errors.

Both of these errors consist of column/row numbers that do not match with the Merkle root and shares that were successfully repaired and verified(all correct shares).

Using this info we need to prepare a fraud proof that will consist of:
 1. Block height;
 2. Non-nil shares returned with error;
 3. Merkle Proofs of non-nil shares from 2;

```go
type BadEncondingFraudProof struct {
    Height uint64
    Shares [][]byte
    MerkleProofs [][]byte
}
```

After generating a BEFP struct we have to broadcast it to light clients within pub-sub. A BEFP will be generated in ipld/read.go and returned from RetrevieData as an error. In this case `share.Service` should broadcast this error to light clients via separate sub-service `FraudProofService`.

## Status
Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

> Detect incorrect block

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Detect incorrectly encoded block
```
